                                  ------------COMMAND LINE------------  

echo : It simply displays or "echoes" the text you probide as argument back to the terminal . 
filesystem : files these files are organized within a hierarchical structure known as filesystem .
path : is a sequence of directories that leads from a starting point to a specific destination .

difference between shell & terminal : 

shell is The program that interprets and executes your commands (such as Bash, Zsh, PowerShell, CMD)
Terminal Emulator : A graphical program that opens a window for you to communicate with the shell (such as GNOME Terminal, Konsole, iTerm2)





date : displays the current time and date .
uptime : display how long the system has been running and the average number of processes running over various periods of time .
df : to see the current amount of free space on out disk drives . 
    df -h (human-readable) : it displays numbers in a way that is understandable to humans . 
    df -T : flag show the filesystem type .
free : display the amount of free memory . 
exit : closing the terminal .



pwd (Print Working Directory) : Print name of current working directory .
cd (Change directory) : to move around the linux filesystem .
    cd . (current directory) : Represents the directory you are currently in .  
    cd ..  (parent directory)  : Moves you one level up to the directory containing your current one.

ls (List Directories)  : will list the directories and files in your current directory .
    ls -a (all) : you can view all files and hidden files .
    ls -l (long) : show detailed information starting from the left , file permissions, number of links, owner name, owner group, file size, timestamp of last modification, and the file or directory name.
    ls -r (reverse) : lest files and directories in reverse alphabetical order . 
    ls -al || ls -lar  :  al >> all and long    &&     lar >> all , long and reverse   .  

touch : create empty file , original function of touch command is ( to update ) the access and modification timestamp s of file or directory . 
    touch -r (reference file) : allow to set a file's timestamp to match that of another file . 
    touch -d (date and time) : can ste a files timestamp to a specific date and time ,   ( "2023-01-01 12:30:00" file name ) .
    
nano : to writing content within the file . 


file : command use to find the file type of a file . 

cat (concatenate) : display the contents of files , cant show the content of directory .
    cat > : quick way to write text into file directly  Ctrl+D >>> save and exit     but if write new line the first line will deleat . 
    cat >> : add to the file without deleting the previous content . 
    cat -n : this option numbers all lines starting from 1 .
    cat -b : this option numbers only the non-empty output lines. 

less : it will open the file in the less interface > go to starte  (g) got to end (shift +g).
    /search_term: Searches forward for "search_term".
    ?search_term: Searches backward for "search_term".
    n: Jumps to the next occurrence of the search term.
    N: Jumps to the previous occurrence
    q: to quit the less viewer and go back to your shell /.


history : To see the list of commands you have used .
    history -c : it clear the command history for your cutrent session .
    
cp : To copy a file you specify the source file and the destination directiory or path  cp [source] [destination]
    [ source ] : The file or folder you want to copy .
    [ destination ]: The place where you want to put the copy . 
    cp -r(recursive) :To copy a directory and all of its content , including subdirectories . 
    cp -i(interactive) :By default, cp will overwrite a file at the destination if it has the same name. To prevent accidental data loss, use the -i (interactive) flag, which prompts for confirmation before overwriting.
    cp -p :  is particularly useful for backups or when migrating files where preserving timestamps is critical.

mv (move) : it serves two primary purposes >> 
    renaming files or directories :  for renaming 

    moving them to a different location : to move items from one location to another . 
        Note: ' mv ' does not leave a copy of the original file , unlike 'cp'  which copies and leaves the original.
        -t : which allows to specify the target directory first . 
        -i (interactive): it will prompt you for confirmation before overwriting any existing file.
        -b (backup) : If you intend to overwrite a file but want to keep the old version, this option creates a backup of the destination file. The backup is typically renamed with a tilde (~) suffix.
        -v (verbose):  This option makes the mv command print out what it is doing, showing each file being moved or renamed.

Using Wildcards or globbing patterns for buld copying : 
        *  :  Matches any sequence of characters.
        ?  :  Matches any single character.
        []  :  Matches any one of the characters enclosed in the brackets.

mkdir (make Directory) : create a directory .
    -p (parent) : use it for create nested directories 

rm (remove) : deleting files and directories . 
    -f (force)  : To bypass these safety prompts and remove files unconditionally, you can use the force option.
    -i (interactive) : flag prompts you for confirmation before deleting each file, helping to prevent accidental removal
    -r (recursive) : delete a directory and all of its contents.
    rmdir : command will only succeed if the directory is completely empty .


find : to search a file in specific directory , [path] [expression] .
    [path] : directory the search in . 
    [expression] : what i looking for . 
    -name : option allows you to specify the exact name of the file you want to find . 
    -type : specify the type of item you are searching for . 
    -type d : to find a directory instead of a file . 


help : to provide ingormation about other bash built-in commands . 
man (man pages) : provide a detailed description of what a command does , its available options or flags . 
whatis : displays a concise , one-line description of a command directly .

alias : to create a temporary alias that lasts for your current terminal session . 
    unalias : remove an alias .

                         ----------Text-Fu---------
Stdout (standard Out) : A path in the system through which the program's output passes . 
    explain how stdout working first most command in linux produce output data so this output is sent via a channel called (stdout) & (stdout) is connected by default to the screen (terminal) .
                echo"Hello world" >> stdout >> terminal 
        ** the difference between ( output & stdout ) >> 
            Output : The final output you see on the screen is what came out via stdout or may come from other channels.
            stdout :  A path in the system through which the program's output passes

            In linux there are 3 standard channels for working with programs  ???
                0) stdin : input , Example > what you type on the keyboard .
                1) stdout : normal output .
                2) stderr : Error message output .

    Redirecting stdout with : 
        The > character is a redirection operator , It intersects the data heading to stdout and sends it to a next destination (Write) . 

Stdin (Standard In) : It is the program's default input channel .
    under standing (stdin & stdout) ....
        stdin : Aprogram reads data from stdin .
            stdin here Not the keyboard itself , The keyboard is just a default source; however, this source can be changed to something else, such as a file.  
                so keyboard is (source) , file here is source 
                but data Which are read and implemented is (input) , data inside file .
        stdout : and writes it's results to stdout . 
    Redirecting stdin with  : 
        use < We use it to make the program read from a file via stdin instead of waiting for typing from the keyboard.(read) .
Stderr (Standard Error) : is a default output stream used by programs to send error messages and diagnostics .
    Understanding File Descriptors : To manage I/O streams like stdin, stdout, and stderr, the system uses file descriptors.
            file descriptor is a non-negative number that the kernel uses to identify an open file or stream. The default file descriptors are:
                0: stdin (standard input)
                1: stdout (standard output)
                2: stderr (standard error) , he number 2 is the dedicated stderr file descriptor, and we can use it to control /where error messages go/.


















































                         ----------FILESYSTEM---------

File system hierarchy : most linux distributions organize their filesystem according to the linux file system hierarchy(FHS).
    The root directory : "/" the starting point for the entir filesystem , every single file and directiory in your system is located under this directory. 
    Essential system directiories : 
        /bin : contains essential command-line programs (binaries) available to all users .
        /sbin : Holds essential system binaries, which are primarily intended for system administration and can typically only be run by the root user.
        /etc : This is the core system configuration directory  .
        /lib :  Contains essential shared library files that system binaries in /bin and /sbin depend on to function correctly.
        /boot : Stores the files required for the system's boot process, including the Linux kernel and the boot loader files.
    User and Application Data : 
        /home : Contains personal directories for each user. This is where you store your documents, application settings, and other personal files.
        /root :  The home directory for the root user . 
        /opt : Reserved for optional or third-party application software packages.
        /usr : This directory contains user-installed software and utilities .
    Dynamic and Temporary Data : 
        /var : Stands for "variable"  and stores files that are expected to change in size and content such as system logs .
        /tmp :  A world-writable space for storing temporary files , Files in this directory are often deleted upon system reboot.
        /run : Contains information about the running system since the last boot, such as process IDs (PIDs) and other runtime data.
    Device and Mount points : 
        /dev :  Contains special device files that represent hardware components like hard drives, terminals, and input devices.
        /media : A standard mount point for removable media like USB drives, SD cards, and CD-ROMs.
        /mnt :  A generic mount point for temporarily mounting filesystems.
    System information : 
        /proc : A virtual filesystem that provides real-time information about currently running processes and kernel parameters.
        /srv :  Intended for site-specific data served by the system, such as files for a web server. 

File system type : 
    (VFS) : is an abstraction layer in the Linux kernel that sits between applications and the various filesystems
    journaled filesystem : Before performing a write operation, it first records the intended changes in a special log file, or "journal." Once the operation is successfully completed, the journal is updated to mark the task as finished. If a crash occurs, the system can simply read the journal upon reboot to see which operations were in progress and quickly bring the filesystem back to a consistent state. This dramatically reduces recovery time and protects against data corruption.
    Common Linux File System Types : 
        ext4 : 
        Btrfs : 
        XFS : 
        NTFS and FAT : 
        HFS+ : 
Anatomy of a Disk : A hard disk in Linux can be subdivided in to partitions .
    Partitions table : specifies where each partition begins and ends, which partitions are bootable, and what sectors of the disk are allocated to each partition , and there are two primary partition table schemes >> 
        MBR partition (Master Boot Record) : is the traditional partition table standard .
            It supports primary, extended, and logical partitions.
            It supports disks up to 2 terabytes in size .  
        GPT partitions (GUID) : is the modern standard for disk partitioning . 
            It has only one type of partition, and you can create a large number of them.

    File system structure : a filesystem is an organized collection of files and directories. At its core, it consists of a database to manage files and the files themselves 
        Boot block :  It contains information used to boot the operating system ,
        Superblock : This is a single block following the boot block that contains metadata about the filesystem.
        Inode table : This is the database that manages files and directories .
        Data blocks : This is where the actual content of your files and directories is stored.
Disk Partitioning : 
    To partition our disk : There are many tools
       fdisk :  A basic command-line partitioning tool; it does not support GPT .
       parted : A powerful command-line tool that supports both MBR and GPT partitioning.
       gparted :  The graphical version of parted .
       gdisk : Similar to fdisk , but it only supports GPT.
    sudo parted -l :  helps to find the correct device name .
    sudo parted : where you can run commands to manage your device's partitions.
    select (Selecting a Device) : you must select the disk you want to modify. Be very careful to choose the correct one to avoid data loss. 
    Viewing the Partition Table : print : command to display the partition table of the selected disk.
    Creating a Partition : 
        mkpart :  command creates a new partition ,  You need to specify the partition type ,an optional filesystem type, and the start and end points.
        resizepart : You'll need the partition number and the new end point. 

 
 Creating Filesystems : 
    mkfs (make filesystem) :  

                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
mount and umount :                                                 
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
/etc/fstab  :                                               
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
swap : 
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
Disk Usage : 
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
Filesystems Repair : 
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
inodes : 
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
symlinks : 
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .